##UNINTERRUPTIBLE POWER SUPPLIES
13.1 PURPOSE
13.1.1 The purpose of a UPS in a DP system is to provide:-
1. Stable, clean power.
2. Continuity of power during main power system outage.
3. Power system transient ride through capabilities.

13.1.2 Design of UPS systems follow either a centralized topology or distributed topology.
Centralized topology lends itself to a robust system but introduces commonality while a
distributed system potentially could be less robust but minimizes commonality.
Commonality potentially increases the amount of equipment lost as a consequence of
failure.

13.1.3 The design of UPS systems, their power sources and distribution should:
1. Accomplish robustness.
2. Follow the WCFDI.
3. Not introduce additional vulnerabilities.

13.2 TOPOLOGY

13.2.1 Design of UPS systems follow either a centralized topology or distributed topology.
Centralized topology lends itself to a robust system but introduces commonality while a
distributed system potentially could be less robust but minimizes commonality.
Commonality potentially increases the amount of equipment lost as a consequence of
failure. Distribution of UPS power from centralized sources may be particularly challenging
in DP Class 3 designs but some compromise between a large number of small UPSs and
fewer larger UPSs (supporting the overall split in the redundancy concept) should be
achievable.

13.2.2 The redundancy concept should not be dependent on battery endurance. UPSs should be
provided in a manner which supports the WCFDI and matches the divisions in the
redundancy concept. (Minimum two UPSs for DP Class 2 two-way split and minimum
three UPSs for DP Class 3 two-way split plus backup DP control system).

13.2.3 The UPS battery endurance should only be considered as providing time to transfer
control to other control equipment in an orderly manner. The DP system will typically not
be fully fault tolerant once one of the UPSs has failed. It may be possible to recover
operation by switching to the bypass depending on the nature of the UPS fault but fault
tolerance may still be compromised.

13.2.4 Failure of a UPS output should not lead to failure effects exceeding the worst case failure
design intent. Input power supplies for DP related UPS’s should be split in line with the
redundancy concept. Where a group of UPS’s share a common input power supply, loss
of that power supply (switchboard) should not lead to failure effects exceeding the worst
case failure design intent when all UPS batteries in that group are exhausted.
Classification society requirements for UPS battery endurance are typically 30 minutes.
Consideration should be given to extending the endurance if required by the industrial
mission. Where UPS’s are provided with a normal and back up supply, the normal power
supply should be from the appropriate part of the main power systems. The back up
supply should be from the emergency switch board.

13.2.5 Design should acknowledge the reluctance to test UPS systems and incorporate means to
establish conditions of the batteries. Testing of UPS systems should include testing under
load conditions.

13.3 RECOVERY FROM ESD

13.3.1 Designers should be aware that some UPSs will not start from battery supply alone. This
type of UPSs is unsuitable for DP vessels especially, those vessels with Emergency Shut
Down (ESD) systems which disconnect the battery on ESD 0 (total shutdown). The UPS
will not restart when the battery is reconnected and therefore there will be no control power
available to restart the power plant. It may be possible to overcome this by arranging for
backup supplies from the emergency generator but this approach makes recovery from
ESD 0 dependent on the emergency generator starting. Dependence on the emergency
generator for DP operations is to be avoided.
13.3.2 There is significant variation in the quality of batteries available for UPSs and the price
difference is often related to the life expectancy of the batteries supplied with a unit. A
cheaper UPS may appear attractive but the cost of ownership may be greater if the
batteries have to be changed more frequently. Careful consideration should be given to
the choice of control system UPSs in the vessel’s specification. Further details can be
found in IMCA M196 ‘Guidance on The Design, Selection, Installation and Use of
Uninterruptible Power Supplies Onboard Vessels’.

13.3.3 There are several types of UPS.
1. The ‘online’ type, also known as the ‘double conversion’ type is the recommended
UPS type for control systems onboard vessels.
2. Line interactive types may exhibit a small output voltage glitch as they transfer from
line power to battery power. This glitch is usually too brief to affect the operation of
controls systems with DC power supplies but may be detected by protective
functions on variable speed drives as an indication that the control supply is failing.
The drive may shut down in response leading to loss of thrust.

13.3.4 UPS designs having a function called Phase Tracking are not suitable for vessel
applications. These UPSs attempt to track the mains power frequency waveform for
synchronization purposes and are used in land based applications.

13.3.5 Some types of UPS are unable to charge their batteries from the poor quality power
supplies found on some DP vessels due to high levels of harmonic content and poor
voltage and frequency stability. Thus their batteries may be discharged when called upon
to provide power in a blackout.

13.3.6 UPSs should have their normal power supply aligned to the same side of the redundancy
concept as the equipment they supply.

13.3.7 The practice of supplying all UPSs and DC battery systems only from the emergency
switchboard should be avoided. This is contrary to SOLAS and some classification society
DP rules. Failure of the emergency switchboard such as a faulty circuit breaker or service
transformer fault can limit the vessel’s time on DP to the battery endurance, after which the
vessel may be completely without power.

13.3.8 The emergency switchboard may be usefully employed as a backup supply to UPSs to
allow batteries to be charged when the main power system is not available. Automatic and
manual transfer to the backup supply is possible.

13.3.9 There should be a remote indication that the UPS is connected to its normal supply. In the
case of automatic transfer to the backup supply, the changeover should be carefully
designed to prevent a faulty UPS transferring and affecting main and emergency supplies.

13.3.10 UPSs should be provided with comprehensive alarm and monitoring facilities. As a
minimum there should be alarms to indicate.
1. UPS on batteries.
2. UPS in bypass.
3. Battery disconnected.
4. Mains power present.

13.3.11 UPS output should not cross the boundaries between redundant equipment groups. This is
particularly important in DP Class 3 designs.

13.3.12 Discrimination is a property of electrical protection schemes. Full discrimination is
achieved if a fault is isolated at source under defined power distribution system
configurations. Discrimination may be achieved by varying the current and/or the time at
which protection devices in the fault current path operate. Typically the highest current or
longest delay is applied to the protection devices nearest the power source To achieve full
discrimination in over current protection the power source must be able to supply the
required level of fault current for a time exceeding the longest delay. Some types of UPS
may not be able to deliver sufficient fault current to clear faults selectively. Ideally UPS
distribution should stay within the redundant machinery and control system group and not
be used to power equipment in other redundant machinery groups. Adopting this design
approach prevents voltage dips, over voltages and other faults transferring from one
redundant system to the other. UPSs for DP controls systems should be able to clear
faults selectively. Care should be take to confirm a UPS has all the necessary attributes
required by the redundancy concept

13.3.13 Some classification societies require UPS battery charging to cease on loss of ventilation.
Care should be taken not to create a common cause failure associated with ventilation
design including its power supply. Suitable alarms should be provided to indicate that
charging of the battery has been stopped. This common cause failure can be avoided by
using sealed batteries not requiring ventilation.

13.3.14 The practice of switching UPS outputs to allow various loads to be supplied by any UPS
may allow failure effects to exceed the worst case failure design intent.
MARINE TECHNOLOGY SOCIETY
DP VESSEL DESIGN PHILOSOPHY GUIDELINES
102 MTS DP Vessel Design Philosophy Document - Part II.doc

13.3.15 DP system FMEAs should not consider a UPS to be an infallible supply. Analysis should
consider UPSs to fail like any other power distribution system. UPSs can fail causing:
1. Over and under voltage.
2. Over and under frequency.
3. Short circuit.
4. Earth fault.
5. Open circuit.
6. Phase failure (on three phase UPSs).
